Have you enjoyed studying the book,
imitate their faith as much as I have?
It's a wonderful book, isn't it?
And I was particularly captivated by the introduction.
There was a point in the introduction that encouraged us to use
our imagination when we're reading the Bible,
to see the sights, to hear the sounds,
to smell the aromas, to try to capture the feelings
of the individuals that we are reading about.
Now, of course, we don't want our imagination to run away with us.
But at the same time, we do want to get a solid,
mental picture of what we're reading.
And that's what I'd like to talk to you about today.
When you're reading the Bible, try to get the whole picture.
Now, we'll use a couple of well-known Bible accounts to illustrate.
Have you been raised in a step family or a blended family?
If you have, did you know that you have something in common
with Joseph, the son of Jacob?
Joseph was raised with 10 half-brothers in a large blended family.
So, now you want to try to view this family as a composite.
You want to try to figure out how did people mash
or how did they clash within this family?
What would you do?
Well, you might start by writing down some of the characteristics
of the individual members of the family.
What about Joseph's half-brothers and Joseph himself?
What do you know about them?
What about Judah?
Simion?
Levi?
Dan?
Nathalie?
What do you know?
So, write down their characteristics and try to figure out
how they might get along.
Sometimes, there is one individual incident
that's recorded in the Bible.
But we mustn't forget.
People's actions have a way of affecting other people.
So, when you read about a certain incident in the Bible,
try to imagine who might have been affected by that incident.
Take an example.
In the book of Genesis, we read that Jacob's son, Ruben,
committed sexual immorality with Bilha.
Well, that had an effect on other people without doubt.
Who was Ruben?
He was Leah's oldest son.
Who was Bilha?
Rachel's handmaiden.
Do you think that there might have been a little animosity or tension
between Leah and Rachel sometimes?
Especially when you consider how their marriage has started out?
There may have been.
And it may be that the attitudes of the women
had some bearing on the attitudes of their sons as well.
So, you take all of these things into consideration.
Now, Bilha had two sons, Dan and Naftali.
How do you think they felt when they learned that their oldest brother
or half brother had committed fornication with their mother?
So, there could have been tension there.
And this all goes into the mix when we're considering the family
as a composite.
Now, do you picture Joseph at age 17
with 10 much older, half brothers, maybe in their 30s?
Some old enough to be his father?
Not true.
The truth is that there was only a seven-year age difference
between Joseph's oldest brother, Ruben, and Joseph himself.
In fact, 11 of Jacob's sons were born during the seven-year period
when Jacob was working for Laban.
11 sons in seven years?
How is that possible?
Easy.
When you remember that Jacob had two wives and two culture binds
or secondary wives.
So, they didn't have to be a nine-month interval
between the birth of the children.
Some could have been born just about at the same time.
They could have been the same age.
So, when Joseph was sold into slavery at age 17,
his oldest brother was no more than 24.
Some of his brothers were only a year or two older than Joseph himself.
So, we're talking about a group of young men in their late teens and early 20s
and this might explain some of the hot-headed reactions that some of those young men had.
Well, so much for the boys.
What about their father, Jacob?
What can we learn about him?
A lot.
For one thing, he was a spiritual man.
Now, this is something for you young brothers and sisters
who are contemplating marriage to think about.
Jacob was willing to go to any length to keep his relationship with Jehovah intact.
Let's take an example.
Genesis chapter 29 and verse 18.
You can follow along on the screen as I read this.
And we're talking about marriage here.
Genesis 29, 18, it says,
Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel.
So, he said,
I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter, Rachel.
Now, what's the takeaway?
Jacob didn't marry the first person who came along, maybe some pagan woman.
He didn't say, well, seven years is too long to wait.
I'm going to find some Felistian woman, now marry her.
He was willing to wait so that he could marry someone who would join him in the worship of Jehovah.
And you young folks, if you are willing to wait,
you can be sure that you will have Jehovah's blessing as well.
Now, Jacob was apparently also a bit of a romantic, notice verse 20.
It says, and Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but notice this.
But in his eyes, they were like just a few days because of his love for her.
Isn't that poetic?
Jacob may have learned to treasure his wife by observing his parents Isaac and Rebecca.
It appears that they had a strong marriage.
I just noticed what we read at Genesis 26 and verse 8.
Genesis 26 and verse 8.
It says, after some time had passed,
a bimolec king of the Felistians was looking out of the window,
and he saw Isaac, that's Jacob's father, displaying affection for Rebecca his wife.
So it appears that Isaac and Rebecca had a warm relationship, a good marriage.
Now, what else can we learn about Jacob?
There's an interesting detail recorded in chapter 25 and verse 27.
It says, as the boys got bigger,
Esau, Jacob's brother, became a skilled hunter, a man in the field,
but Jacob was a blameless man, dwelling in tents.
So Jacob liked to dwell in tents.
That might explain the strong bond that developed between Jacob and Joseph,
who was his youngest for many years.
Although Jacob liked to dwell in tents, he was by no means a sissy.
He was a strong man, but he was a spiritual man.
That's something for you, young brothers, to take away.
You want to be strong, we know you do, but spirituality should come first.
One time, spiritual Jacob gave his sons a beautiful lesson on how to settle a difference with a family member.
We read about it at Genesis chapter 32,
and I think all of us can learn from his example.
We learn at Genesis 32 that Jacob's brother Esau was coming to see him.
Now, they hadn't seen each other for 20 years,
and to say that their parting had been difficult is an understatement.
The fact is that when they separated more than 20 years earlier,
Esau had vowed that one day he was going to kill his brother.
Now he was coming to see him.
Now, why was he so angry with Jacob?
It's because Jacob had received a blessing from their father,
and Esau was not happy.
So Esau arrives, and 400 men are with him.
Why 400 men? Well, the Bible doesn't say,
but it could be that he was trying to show how important and prominent he had become.
How did Jacob react? Did he try to go tit for tat?
Did he try to show how important and prominent he had become
with all of the blessings he'd received?
Did he reopen old wounds? Did he argue with his brother?
Did he say, you know, I was right all along,
and you Esau, you have been wrong.
Did he demand an apology? No.
There was a lot that Jacob could have bragged about, no question about that.
There was no doubt that Jacob had Jehovah's blessing.
Early on, we read that an angel of Jehovah had appeared to him,
and said, I am Jehovah.
The God of Abraham, your father, and the God of Isaac.
The land on which you are lying to you, I am going to give it, and to your offspring.
I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go.
I will not leave you.
Well, that's quite a blessing, isn't it? But there's more.
For a portion of the previous night, that is, the night before Esau and Jacob met up,
Jacob had wrestled with an angel.
And as a result, he had managed to receive another blessing.
But Jacob didn't flaunt his blessings.
Instead, he humbled himself.
In fact, he even bowed down seven times before his brother,
in front of his wives and his eleven sons.
So Jacob settled any lingering difference with Esau, not with his fists,
not with a bragging tongue, not with a weapon, but humbly,
like a real man, like a real spiritual man.
In contrast, how did Jacob's ten sons settle their difference with Joseph?
Like a bunch of cowards, it was ten to one against Joseph.
First, they decided to kill their brother,
and then they delivered him up into slavery.
Those jealous young men didn't learn a thing from their father's excellent spiritual example.
Well, if you're on the outs with a member of your family,
if you had a serious difficulty with someone,
could you try to settle a matter peacefully as Jacob did?
If the person tries to apologize, be gracious about it.
Don't make it difficult for him to apologize.
Don't dredge up all of the unnecessary details about the past.
You may be in the right, as Jacob was,
but isn't the important thing to make peace?
Jehovah loves the peacemakers.
Well, what else do we learn about Jacob?
We learn that he wasn't his father's favorite.
Let's look at Genesis chapter 25, verse 28.
And Isaac loved Issa,
because it meant game in his mouth,
whereas Rebecca loved Jacob.
Now, this story may resonate with many of you out there,
especially if you've grown up in a large family,
or perhaps you've had a number of brothers and sisters.
Now, we know your parents claim that they always treated all of you the same,
that they never ever had a preference.
But ask the kids,
was there anyone in the family who was the favorite?
They all know she was.
They know this.
The parents don't realize it,
but they are giving preferential treatment.
And so, this happens, and it can be disconcerting at times.
Imagine this scenario.
Imagine that you have a couple who have two children, two sons.
One is a pioneer.
He has never given his parents a moment's grief.
The other never accepted the truth,
but he's done well in business.
And as a result, he's been generous to his parents.
And the parents are grateful, very grateful.
And the pioneer often hears the parents bragging about the successes
that his brother has had in business.
Well, the pioneer can't help.
The parents are materially very much.
And so, he feels that there's a bit of partiality there.
Is it hurtful?
Yes, but his life.
It's chemistry.
It's just chemistry.
But the pioneer needs to realize
that Jehovah God appreciates his work.
His Heavenly Father loves him very much
for the work that he's doing for his name.
Now, Jacob must have known
that Isaac loved his brother more than he loved him.
And perhaps he vowed that when he had children,
he would treat them all the same.
Well, if he did, he didn't keep that promise, did he?
Everyone knew that Joseph was the favorite.
Well, have you noticed what we had to do
to make a composite of this family?
We had to read from several different chapters of the Bible.
Genesis 25, 26, 28, 29, 32.
You can't always get a complete picture
of an incident by reading just one chapter,
just by reading the chapter you're reading.
Sometimes you have to extract details
from other chapters of the Bible.
Now, let's consider one more example.
We're getting the complete picture
can enrich our understanding.
This is going to be a shorter one.
We're going to consider the story of Nehaman.
Now, you remember the story.
As 2 Kings chapter 5 and verse 1,
we learned that Nehaman was the chief of the army
of Ben-Hadad II, the king of Syria.
But he was a leper.
Now, Ben-Hadad learned that there was a prophet in Israel,
Elisha, who could heal him of his leprosy.
And so he told Nehaman that he should go to Israel
and go to the prophet and get healed.
And so, word was sent to the king of Israel by letter.
And the king of Israel was asked to send Nehaman to Elisha.
Now, when you think of it, this was a strange request.
Because Israel and Syria were often at odds.
Sometimes there were wars between them.
And now, here you have the king of Syria sending his general,
the one who's going to head the army against Israel,
and saying, well, I'd like my general to be a more effective general.
Could you please make sure that he gets healed?
Well, somehow, he sent to Elisha
and Elisha kindly heals Nehaman.
And Nehaman becomes a worshiper of Jehovah.
Well, we can imagine, remember we're talking about using our imagination,
we can imagine that when Nehaman returned to Syria,
Ben-Hadad said, had lots of nice things to say about Elisha.
So then, everyone lived happily ever after, right?
If we didn't read on, we might think so.
But that's not the end of the story.
In the next chapter, chapter 6,
we learned that Ben-Hadad declared war against Israel.
Now, if Nehaman was still the chief of the army,
he'd be in an awkward position.
Was he going to lead the armies of Syria against fellow worshippers of Jehovah?
But it gets worse.
Ben-Hadad learns that Elisha is revealing the Syrian's war strategies
to the king of Israel.
So he sends a large army to capture Elisha.
The very man who had healed his general.
So much for gratitude.
Now, it's interesting that Nehaman is not mentioned as being at the head of those armies.
Did he get out of it somehow?
Don't ask me. If he's resurrected, you'll have to ask him.
What lesson can we learn?
That the gratitude of the world is fleeting.
Some of us may get excited if there's a favorable article about Jehovah's Witnesses in a newspaper
if some TV personality makes a kind statement about us.
But what does Jehovah God say? Genesis 3.15?
I will put enmity between you and the woman.
So Jehovah's organization and Satan's organization are always going to be at odds.
Bible reading isn't a chore. It's a joy.
Get the whole picture of what you're reading and you'll enjoy it even more.
We wish you all Jehovah's rich blessing as you continue to enhance your appreciation for this sacred volume.